% premier pages submission

1.  Names: David Lyons and Scott Walck

2.  Departments: Mathematical Sciences and Physics

3. Describe your recently completed (no earlier than Spring 2008)
research project, publication, creative work or performance: 

Since spring 2008, the LVC Mathematical Physics Research Group has
published 4 papers in research journals and given 11 presentations at
regional, national, and international conferences, colloquia and
seminars.  
            (a) using language of specialists in your field;  

Work in the last 18 months continues the group's program of stabilizer
classification for the local unitary group action on multiparty quantum
states, and also settles a question of which pure states are uniquely
determined by a given set of reduced density matrices.  The stabilizer
program is concerned with the classification of multiparty entanglement,
and the latter result is related to the N-representability problem.

      and (b) in plain language for a general reader. 

Work in the last 18 months continues the group's program of studying the
phenomenon of quantum entanglement as it pertains to applications in
quantum computing and communications.  Loosely speaking, we seek to
identify quantum states that will be especially useful for applications
of quantum information theory.  We also study the relation between
information contained in quantum states and information contained in
subsystems.  Both of these lines of investigation are of active interest
to researchers in mathematics, physics, computer science, and chemistry.

4.  Explain how this work fits into the larger context of intellectual
inquiry in your discipline(s).

Quantum information theory seeks to understand the computational and
communication power of quantum systems.  Applied quantum information
science works to solve engineering problems to construct new devices
called quantum computers.  The phenomenon of quantum entanglement plays
a key role in theory and applications, yet it is poorly understood at
present.  Lyons and Walck have pursued a program that achieves a partial
classification of entanglement types using the mathematical tools of Lie
theory. 

5.  When appropriate, explain how this accomplishment fits into your
broader program of ongoing research, performance and/or creative work. 

Lyons and Walck have just been awarded (as of September 2009) a National
Science Foundation (NSF) grant, renewable for 3 years, that continues
the work funded by their previous NSF grant.  The current project is a
series of investigations that follows naturally from previous work in
entanglement classification.

6.  List bibliographic data for publications, presentations,
performances, etc. arising from this work.  Are there links to other
websites, etc. that display the work?   If you can include any
electronic images, etc. that would be helpful, please do. 

See http://quantum.lvc.edu/mathphys/pubs2.html

7.  When appropriate, list collaborators, if any, and describe the
nature of the collaboration.  

Lyons' and Walck's collaborators are their student research assistants.
Recent student researchers have been Stephanie Blanda '09, Curt Cenci
'11, Laura Snyder '11, and Adam Hansell '11.

8.  Give any additional information that would help make this an
interesting story for a web page.

See http://quantum.lvc.edu/mathphys
